---
layout: "@layouts/ArticleLayout.astro"
title: Going the Extra Mile - Extracurricular participation in schools 
date: 28 June 2023
image: /images/my-second-article/tennis.jpg
---

The importance of extracurricular activity in primary and secondary education is often understated in comparison with the focus on the mainline academic aspect of schooling. Soft skills, wellbeing (both physical and mental), life chances and academic achievement are all closely tied to these activities. This article attempts to shed some light on this matter and investigate its real significance to students and young people. The impact of extracurricular activity, or lack thereof, and how this differs between private and state school will be explored by analysing and comparing multiple sources that include research papers, news articles and review journals. By the end of the article, it is hoped that this subject is demonstrated to be a clear area of interest for any discussion around both social mobility and poverty alleviation.

While studying the role, perceived or otherwise, played by extra-curricular activities in both private schools and state schools, it is important to account for the opinions and image pushed by the institutions themselves as well as the opinions of parents and students. It quickly becomes evident that independent schools heavily integrate the availability of these activities at their institutions into their promotion and enrolment strategies. Sports in particular play an important role in maintaining the status and attractiveness of many independent schools. An article published in School House magazine, a biannual publication that covers private school news and events, details how they are “championing the arts, music and culture”. Extra-curricular activities also feature heavily on the websites of many private schools, typically in the “About us” section, as well as prominently in their promotional videos, such as that of Brighton College (1). However, when looking at the websites of several comprehensive primary and secondary schools, this information was not featured prominently and often not featured at all, such as on the websites of Bartley Green school in Birmingham, Canning Street Primary school in Newcastle and St Columba’s Catholic Boys’ School in London. Instead, state schools promote academic results and Ofsted ratings much more aggressively. But why this difference in representation? Comprehensive schools do not need to advertise themselves as much as private schools for enrolment, since they typically get enrolment from their “catchment” area, whereas independent schools rely on appealing to parents, particularly those with the highest fees and boarding schools, in order to effectively sell their places. However, does this fully explain why private schools offer a better selection of co-curricular activity? Not entirely. The impact on the development of students who take part in these activities also plays a significant role in the decision making of fee-paying schools to integrate these activities so heavily.

When researching this topic, a recent government issued research paper, titled “An Unequal Playing Field”, published under the social mobility commission proved incredibly helpful and informative and is a recommended read for more detail. It showed that although the exact impact of different levels of student participation is difficult to measure, mainly due to its qualitative and subjective nature, clear correlation with academic achievement is evident, as well as widespread positive feedback from students regarding their experiences with school clubs and sports. First and foremost, participation in co-curricular activity of any type can be used to accurately predict intention to continue education after secondary school, and as a result it is of no surprise that private schools have drastically higher rates of students going on to university. Extra-curricular activities are also major factors in the instillation of soft skills, for example teamwork, leadership and communication. These skills are highly sought after by employers and therefore, offering a range of high-quality sports and clubs at school acts as a great method to improve the life chances of students. However, it is here that the advantages gained by students of independent schools differ. Extra- curricular activity within the setting of private schools also offer an opportunity for networking. It not only supplies the skills of being able to network, but also allows these students to build relationships with people who, statistically, will obtain more lucrative employment and higher levels of education. This means that those who were privately educated have greater opportunity to build skills desirable to employers and already have a networking foundation. On the other hand, although state school-provided extra- curricular activity still affords similar results for academic attendance and soft skills, they are unable to grant the same networking opportunities. The benefits for state school students are more evident in the impact on physical and mental wellbeing. Sports offer obvious health benefits however activities of all types also foster feelings of community and belonging. The problem lies, though, in the ease of access to these opportunities. State schools offer significantly less extra-curricular activity due to government-controlled funding and students are less likely to participate due to a variety of socio-economic reasons. Clubs with participation fees deter those from poorer households and a lack of knowledge of the existence of some activities can prevent participation (2). It is important to also note the effect of “perceived exclusivity” (2). Many activities suffer from significant underrepresentation in terms of gender, race, class and sexuality, causing certain students to feel like they would not fit in (2). These barriers are less evident in independent schools where parents are far more likely to have the means to afford membership fees and where the settings tend to be less diverse from the beginning.

So what can be done to remedy the glaring disparities outlined above? The report mentioned earlier offers several ideas to be implemented and importantly it does not solely focus on schools. Local councils and youth clubs also need to have the capabilities to offer activities and spaces to secondary-age students outside of school. The report also suggests much improved funding and further research. I propose that greater funding in the hands of schools will not fix the root of the problem. Attitudes of schools, theri heads and their governors must change away from privileging purely academic results as indicators of student wellbeing. The role and status of private schools in the United Kingdom must also be addressed, but this is a topic of a much wider scope. 

